fix: Add timeout resolution for MD and active-learning subprocesses (#240)
duartegroup/mlp-train: docs/dev/parallelism.rst

start further processes (PLUMED, a QM code, or a pool of metadynamics
walkers). This page describes that structure, the three timeouts that bound
it, and the constraints it places on contributors.

=================
The process tree
=================

.. code-block:: text

    al_train()                                     parent process
      └─ _add_active_configs()
           ├─ mp.Process  worker idx=0             one per configuration
           │    └─ _gen_active_config()
           │         └─ run_mlp_md() / run_mlp_md_openmm()
           │              ├─ SIGALRM timer         inner timeout
           │              └─ Popen(...)            PLUMED driver, ORCA (autodE)
           ├─ mp.Process  worker idx=1
           ├─ ...
           └─ mp.Queue                             (idx, status, config, error)

``Metadynamics`` adds another level when it is driven from within a worker:

.. code-block:: text

    Metadynamics.run_metadynamics()
      └─ ProcessPoolExecutor(mp_context=spawn)
           └─ _run_single_metad()  ×  n_runs
                └─ run_mlp_md()  →  PLUMED

All process creation uses the ``spawn`` start method.

=====================================

> Why not ``multiprocessing.Pool``

Reviewer: Can this be rewritten in a positive way? E.g., why ProcessPoolExecutor instead of 'Why not ...' .

=====================================

Both ``_add_active_configs`` and ``Metadynamics`` previously used
``mp.get_context('spawn').Pool(...)``. Two properties of ``Pool`` made that
untenable:

1. **Pool workers are daemonic.** A daemonic process is not allowed to have
   children, so any nesting in the tree above is illegal from inside a pool
   worker. ``concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor`` creates non-daemonic
   workers, which is why ``Metadynamics`` now uses it.

2. **There is no way to reclaim a wedged worker.** The collection loop called
   ``AsyncResult.get(timeout=None)``, so a single non-terminating trajectory
   blocked the parent indefinitely — the whole active-learning run stalled
   with no log output and no way to recover short of killing the job.

``_add_active_configs`` therefore manages raw ``mp.Process`` objects and a
``mp.Queue`` directly, which gives the parent the ability to poll, time out,
and kill.

====================================
Why not the ``fork`` start method
====================================

> Switching from ``spawn`` to ``fork`` is a recurring suggestion, usually on the

Reviewer: I don't really understand this section. Does it basically say that sources in general recommend 'fork'? 
I think this section should be modified again as 'Why spawn' and not the otherway round.

running MACE under OpenMP/MKL threadpools therefore produces children that
deadlock intermittently and unreproducibly. CPython 3.12 emits a
``DeprecationWarning`` for forking a multi-threaded process, and 3.14 changes
the Linux default start method to ``forkserver``.

(``fork`` combined with matplotlib also fails on macOS, but that is the least
of the reasons.)

=====================
The three timeouts
=====================

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 14 30 24 12 40

   * - Layer
     - Mechanism
     - Knob
     - Default
     - Catches
   * - Inner
     - ``SIGALRM`` via ``run_with_timeout``
     - ``Config.dynamics_timeout``
     - 2 h
     - A single ``dyn.run()`` that will not converge
   * - Per-worker
     - Parent poll loop: ``terminate()`` then ``kill()``
     - ``Config.process_timeout``
     - 8 h
     - A worker wedged anywhere, including where ``SIGALRM`` never fires
   * - Loop
     - Hard cap of ``process_timeout + 120 s``
     - *(none)*
     - —
     - The poll loop itself failing to make progress

The inner timeout is **best effort**. ``SIGALRM`` is delivered to the main

> thread of a process, but it can be masked or swallowed entirely by

Reviewer: You are basically saying that the masking by PLUMED and PyTorch is a positive result, right? E.g., that both PLUMED and PyTorch work, they will bypass the 'SIGALRM' and complete the trajectory?

Author: Yes, in certain situations the SIGALRM won't make it through to the running PLUMED or PyTorch and the interrupt won't happen, so it will fall back to the process timeout

The parent drains the queue **inside** the poll loop, on every iteration —
not only after all workers have exited. This is not an optimisation. A
``mp.Queue`` is backed by an OS pipe with a finite buffer; a child that has
written more than the buffer holds blocks in its feeder thread until the
parent reads, and a child blocked that way never exits. Joining before
draining is the classic multiprocessing queue/join deadlock. If you add
anything to the poll loop, keep the drain unconditional.

===============================
Constraints for contributors
===============================

**Everything crossing a process boundary must be picklable under spawn.**
There is no shared memory and no inherited state: the child re-imports
``mlptrain`` from scratch. This is why the worker arguments are built with
``init_config.copy()``, ``mlp.copy()`` and ``selection_method.copy()``, and
why backends must keep their calculators constructible from picklable state.

**Config does not propagate.** ``Config`` is a module-level mutable singleton,
so each spawned child gets a freshly imported copy with the defaults.
Mutating ``Config`` in the parent after workers have started has no effect on

> them; anything a worker needs must be passed through its arguments.

Reviewer: I am not sure I understand what you are trying to say by this part.

Author: Get rid of reference to defaults here, misleading!

> **Failures degrade, they do not raise.** A worker that times out, crashes, or
> whose trajectory is abandoned contributes ``None``. The iteration continues
> with fewer configurations and logs how many were lost. Functions along this
> path return ``Optional`` for that reason — ``run_mlp_md``,
> ``_run_mlp_md``, ``Metadynamics._run_single_metad`` and
> ``_gen_active_config`` all may return ``None``, and callers must check.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Failures degrade, they do not raise.** A worker that times out, crashes, or
whose trajectory is abandoned, for example, because XXX, contributes ``None`` to the pool of workers. The iteration thus continues with fewer configurations and logs how many trajectories were lost. Functions along this
path return ``Optional`` for that reason — ``run_mlp_md``,
``_run_mlp_md``, ``Metadynamics._run_single_metad`` and
``_gen_active_config`` all may return ``None``, and callers must check.

```

Reviewer: I think the title of this section is confusing. I tried to modify this section, but I still do not think it is intelligible enough.

> **Corrupt PLUMED output is expected, not exceptional.** A trajectory that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Corrupt PLUMED output may appear.** A trajectory that
```

diverges before being killed can leave a ``HILLS`` file that is empty,
truncated mid-line, or contains ``NaN`` gaussians. Bias inheritance skips
missing and empty files, drops invalid lines, and falls back to zero
inherited bias if ``plumed sum_hills`` fails, rather than aborting the

> iteration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
truncated mid-line, or contains ``NaN`` gaussians. The
missing and empty files are skipped and not included, and the average is computed without them. Files with invalid lines are still used, but the invalid lines are discarded. If ``plumed sum_hills`` fails, the inherited bias drops to zero, rather than aborting the iteration.
```

==================
Tuning guidance
==================

``_add_active_configs`` splits the available cores across workers::

    n_processes = min(n_configs, Config.n_cores)
    n_cores_pp  = max(Config.n_cores // n_configs, 1)

``Config.n_cores`` must be a multiple of ``n_configs_iter`` when it exceeds

> it, otherwise ``_add_active_configs`` raises. Choosing

Reviewer: Sounds like there is something missing.

``Config.n_cores == n_configs_iter`` gives one core per worker and the
simplest behaviour.

The default ``dynamics_timeout`` of 2 hours is a very loose bound for active
learning, where each step runs ``2 + n_calls**3 + extra_time`` fs — typically
tens to hundreds of femtoseconds. If your trajectories normally finish in
seconds, lowering ``dynamics_timeout`` to a few minutes turns a wasted
overnight run into a wasted coffee break. Keep ``process_timeout``
comfortably above ``dynamics_timeout``: the worker also has to run selection

> and, for the last frame, a single-point QM calculation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default ``dynamics_timeout`` of 2 hours is very generous for active
learning, as each step takes ``2 + n_calls**3 + extra_time`` fs, which is typically
tens to hundreds of femtoseconds. If your trajectories normally finish in
seconds, it is safe to set '' dynamics_timeout `` to a few minutes instead. The ``process_timeout``
should be kept above ``dynamics_timeout``: the worker also has to run selection
and, for the last frame, a single-point QM calculation. For large or difficult-to-converge systems, you might even consider increasing this above the default to avoid killing your jobs mid-convergence.  
```
